## Special challenges facing indigenous persons with disabilities

<ol start="12">
  <li>Indigenous peoples encounter many obstacles and hardships due their racial status in society. Indigenous persons with disabilities often encounter even more inconveniences in daily life, barriers at work, and discrimination against their mental or physical disabilities, as well as their Indigenous origin. All these intersectional factors lead to discrimination against Indigenous persons with disabilities on multiple fronts, and this is even worse for Indigenous women with disabilities. There is an urgent need to establish a protection scheme specifically addressing the situation and the need of Indigenous persons with disabilities, further strengthening their basic rights, including social, civil, education and employment rights.</li>

  <li>The government agencies that are directly mandated with addressing the issue of Indigenous persons with disabilities should be the Ministry of Health and Welfare and Council of Indigenous Peoples. However, these two agencies have not set up a specific unit or allocate staff member in charge of Indigenous persons with disabilities. Furthermore, The State Report does not specifically address the current situation of Indigenous persons with disabilities. This reveals that the national policies and system do not take into consideration the specific needs of Indigenous persons with disabilities. In addition, there is no representative from the Council of Indigenous Peoples or non-government Indigenous Peoples organizations included as members in the Committee on the Protection of Rights of Persons with Disabilities set up by the Social and Family Affairs Administration, Ministry of Health and Welfare (See Paragraph 10 of the State Report). The challenges and specific needs of Indigenous persons with disabilities could not be reflected and discussed in such Committee.</li>

  <li>The Ministry of Health and Welfare only started to collect relevant statistical data on Indigenous persons with disabilities in 2014. Comparing Indigenous statistics with the national data, it shows that the proportion of Indigenous persons with physical disabilities and mental disabilities is higher than national proportion while the proportion of Indigenous persons with chronic psychosis is lower than national proportion. However, the numbers collected are submitted by the local governments based on the number of disability cards or other certified documentations issued. There is no way to verify the accuracy of these numbers. There is also the need for further research and investigation on the gap of the classification of disabilities between the Indigenous and national proportion to clarify if the gap is caused by Indigenous Peoples’ particularities in terms of cultural, economic, political and social perspectives.</li>

  <li>The causes of Indigenous persons with disabilities should be addressed more. factors might include physical disabilities caused by being exposed to high risk working environments, or mental disabilities caused by difficulties in social adjustment and historical colonizations. Indigenous persons with disabilities living in urban or rural areas should receive the same level of protection. Indigenous persons with disabilities living in urban areas are particularly vulnerable to the feeling of loneliness and insecurities, having left their existing social network and support in their hometown and facing the daily pressure of livelihood. Indigenous persons also experience many challenges integrating into mainstream society due to loss of their traditional land and the fast pace of societal modernizations. This significantly increases the rate of education dropout, unemployment, alcoholism, and suicide compare to the general population. However, current psychological counselling and physical and mental health branches of government have no strategies in place to provide the assistance needed to address these specific challenges facing the indigenous people. National policies and frameworks on indigenous people also ignores the specific psychological need of the group, therefore failing to provide adequate systematic protection.</li>

  <li>The government framework in determining and assessing physical and mental disabilities do not take into account of specific culture and language differences between indigenous people and the general population. Key indicators of learning assessment should take into account the student’s own unique cultural and societal backgrounds. In 2013, the government passed Regulation on the Method of Assessing and Determining Students with Physical and Mental Disorders and Gifted Students. Article 10 of the Regulation provides that in the process of assessing a child’s learning disability, one should exclude influencing environmental factors such as insufficient cultural stimulation and inappropriate teaching methods. However, according to the Ministry of Education’s Special Education Transmit Net, the number of indigenous students with special needs is higher than non-indigenous students. Many indigenous students are assessed to have learning difficulties, developmental disabilities and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) by the assessing authorities purely because of their different structural upbringing within their families. For example, an indigenous student may lack Chinese language skills because they were brought up by their grandparents speaking their native languages, this can also influence their world view being more aligned to that of their local community than the views shaped by mainstream education. In addition, the severe shortage of special need educators with indigenous specializations means many indigenous students are labeled with learning difficulties by mainstream teachers, causing further harm to the students. We strongly recommend that the identification and assessment process of indigenous students with special needs should involves parents, regular and special need teachers to minimize cultural and societal bias during the process.</li>
</ol>
